---
title: "HW8 - R Markdown Template of Course Project"
linkTitle: "HW8: R Markdown"
description: >
type: docs
weight: 308
---

<br></br>

## Render R Markdown (Rmd) of your project

Students will choose for this assignment the Rmd template of the workflow they
are expected to complete for their challenge project, meaning either the
[RNA-Seq](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/sprnaseq/sprnaseq/) or the 
[ChIP-Seq](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/sprnaseq/sprnaseq/) workflow 
that were both covered in class.

To get started with the following homework tasks, log in to your HPCC account and create under the course project path `/bigdata/gen242/<user_name>` assigned 
to you the corresponding workflow template using the `genWorkenvir` function. Open with vim/nvim the Rmd file located in the root directory of the chosen workflow. Next make the
following changes (1.-8.) to the R Markdown file, render it to HTML and PDF format, and then submit the rendered report along with the corresponding Rmd source file to GitHub
Classroom as instructed below. The changes to include in the R Markdown are:
    
__Tasks__

Read the [basics of Rmarkdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/authoring_basics.html) formatting.

   1. In the section relating to your challenge project, add a short paragraph describing the analysis steps you have chosen to perform as part of your challenge project. 
   2. In the challenge project section, cite the reference(s) of the paper(s) you have chosen to present in class as part of your course project. For this add the
   reference in BibTeX format to the `bibtex.tex` file located in the root directory of the workflow, and then cite it in the text of the Rmd file so that the properly rendered 
   citation shows up in the text and the corresponding reference is get automatically added to the reference list when running `rmarkdown::render`. Note, references in BibTeX format can be obtained from 
   Google Scholar, Paperpile or most other reference management software. More detailed information about managing references in R Markdown files is [here](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#citations-and-bibliographies).
   3. Add a [mathematical equation](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#mathematical-equations) to the challenge project section.
   4. Evaluate an R expression in the text as inline R code (see [here](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#inline-r-code)) of your challenge project, _e.g._ mathematical or number from an existing R oject such as mean value of the first column of 
      the iris `data.frame`. 
   5. Add a [code chunk](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#r-code-chunks) that auto-generates the barplot for HW3C. This barplot should be embedded in the
      rendered report without saving it intermediately to a file.
   6. Insert the targets file of your workflow (default toy data is sufficient) as an interactive table using the [`DT` package](https://rstudio.github.io/DT/). An example is given in the table section of the R Markdown manual [here](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#with-dtdatatable). 
   7. Use the `rmarkdown::render()` function to render the report to both HTML and PDF formats (details are [here](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#render-rmd-script)). Important: for this assignment it is not relevant to evaluate the code chunks for the actual analysis steps of the analysis workflow. Only the chunks required for the above tasks need to be evaluated. Also, when embedding the targets file under step 6 into the report, the interactive table generated by the `DT` package can only be included in the HTML version of the report. To including this table in the PDF version of the report, use the static `knitr::kable` option instead as outlined [here](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/#with-knitrkable).   
   8. Submit the Rmd, PDF and HTML file for the report to the corresponding repos on GitHub Classroom (see below).
   
## Homework submission

Use your GitHub Classroom repository from the last time, the **project** repository. Create a directory `/hw8` and upload your files in there.
1. Your Rmarkdown file, name it `hw8.Rmd`.
2. HTML rendered file, name it `hw8.html`.
3. PDF rendered file, name it `hw8.pdf`.

bibtex file is not required. 

## Grading
- Upload Rmd: 1
- Upload HTML: 1
- Upload PDF: 1
- Step 1-6: 1 each

Total 9 

### Due date

This homework is due in one week on Thu, May 13th at 6:00 PM.

## Homework Solutions

All solutions for HW08 can be looked up in the R Markdown tutorial of this class. The source code is available in the [Rmd](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tgirke/GEN242/main/content/en/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown.Rmd) file and the rendered result in the corresponding [HTML](https://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/GEN242/tutorials/rmarkdown/rmarkdown/) file. As in all tutorial pages of this site, the Rmd files can also be accessed via a link located in the header section of each tutorial page.  

